CHAPTER III.
EFFECT OF THOUGHT ON HEALTH AND THE BODY.
The body is the servant of the mind.
It obeys the operations of the mind,
whether they be deliberately chosen
or automatically expressed.
At the bidding of unlawful thoughts,
the body sinks rapidly into disease and decay.
At the command of glad and beautiful thoughts,
it becomes clothed with youthfulness and beauty.
Disease and health, like circumstances,
are rooted in thought.
Sickly thoughts will express themselves
through a sickly body.
Thoughts of fear have been known to kill a man
as speedily as a bullet,
and they are continually killing thousands of people
just as surely, though less rapidly.
The people who live in fear of disease
are the people who get it.
Anxiety quickly demoralizes the whole body
and lays it open to the entrance of disease,
while impure thoughts, even if not physically indulged,
will soon shatter the nervous system.
Strong, pure, and happy thoughts
build up the body in vigor and grace.
The body is a delicate and plastic instrument
which responds readily to the thoughts
by which it is impressed,
and habits of thought will produce their own effects,
good or bad, upon it.
Men will continue to have impure and poisoned blood
so long as they propagate unclean thoughts.
Out of a clean heart comes a clean life and a clean body.
Out of a defiled mind proceeds a defiled life
and a corrupt body.
Thought is the fount of action, life, and manifestation.
Make the fountain pure, and all will be pure.
Change of diet will not help a man
who will not change his thoughts.
When a man makes his thoughts pure,
he no longer desires impure food.
If you would perfect your body, guard your mind.
If you would renew your body, beautify your mind.
Thoughts of malice, envy, disappointment, despondency,
rob the body of its health and grace.
A sour face does not come by chance.
It is made by sour thoughts.
Wrinkles that mar are drawn by folly, passion, and pride.
I know a woman of 96 who has the bright,
innocent face of a girl.
I know a man well under middle age
whose face is drawn into inharmonious contours.
The one is the result of a sweet and sunny disposition.
The other is the outcome of passion and discontent.
As you cannot have a sweet and wholesome abode
unless you admit the air and sunshine freely into your rooms,
so a strong body and a bright, happy, or serene continence
can only result from the free admittance
into the mind of thoughts of joy and goodwill and serenity.
On the faces of the age there are wrinkles made by sympathy,
others by strong and pure thoughts,
others are carved by passion.
Who cannot distinguish them?
With those who have lived righteously,
age is calm, peaceful, and softly mellowed,
like the setting sun.
I have recently seen a philosopher on his deathbed.
He was not old except in years.
He died as sweetly and peacefully as he had lived.
There is no physician like cheerful thought
for dissipating the ills of the body.
There is no comforter to compare with goodwill
for dispersing the shadows of grief and sorrow.
To live continually in thoughts of ill-will,
cynicism, suspicion, and envy,
is to be confined in a self-made prison-hole.
But to think well of all, to be cheerful with all,
to patiently learn to find the good in all,
such unselfish thoughts are the very portals
of heaven, and to dwell day by day in thoughts of peace
toward every creature will bring abounding peace
to their possessor.
End of chapter three, Health and the Body.